Title: Developing a Supply Chain Disaster Preparedness Plan
Source: ThomasNet
URL: https://www.thomasnet.com/insights/how-natural-disasters-affect-the-supply-chain-and-how-to-prepare-for-the-worst/
Article:
Climate change and other factors indicate that extreme weather events and other natural disasters are likely to happen more often. Although the ultimate impact of natural disasters is hard to predict in advance, businesses can take a few simple steps to ensure preparedness and speedy recovery.

Create a natural disaster impact response and recovery plan:
Take time to develop well-thought-out, detailed guidelines and directions for team members, and be sure that everyone is on board and familiar with their duties. Look into backup suppliers, review the plan regularly to identify areas for improvements or adjustments, and discuss other factors that will impact disaster recovery.

Engage with suppliers and practice consistent supply chain risk management:
Find out if they have their own disaster response/preparedness plans in place, and what they entail. Creating a supplier scorecard can be helpful for analyzing risk levels and potential problems. This will guide you in determining which third parties are most useful for your business in the event of a disaster. 

Suppliers in developing countries may not have the resources to quickly resume work and cope after a disaster. Understanding the infrastructure of the factory and providing as much support as possible is essential. 

Understand the risks facing your organization’s reputation:
In the event of a natural disaster, how will your business fare in the public eye? Will people look upon your supply chain as reliable and responsible, putting consumers first, or will people be posting on social media about the potentially life-threatening issues they’re experiencing as a result of your poor planning?

If disaster does strike, make sure all investigations are thorough and well conducted

This is an opportunity to learn from mistakes, identify what was done right, and reassess your preparedness plans in relation to the findings. If a disaster occurs in the future, you’ll be better able to handle the after-effects.

Hope for the Best, Prepare for the Worst

Most countries are prone to some kind of disaster. No one enjoys thinking about worst-case scenarios, but when dealing with natural disasters, proper planning and recovery processes are critical for ensuring resiliency in your supply chain.

Since these catastrophic events are unpredictable, companies across the country — and across the globe — should regularly reassess their disaster response plans, analyze risks, and, should the worst occur, determine the most important third parties for rebuilding and recovering.

What Can Be Learned From Natural Disasters and Their Impact on Supply Chains:
World events like this can be disastrous for infrastructure, survivors, and the supply chain. With more preparation, it’s possible to soften the blow of natural disasters — though not always. 

Some economies have the resources to quickly heal and bounce back from a natural disaster, but others do not. For instance, developing countries may not have the resources for quick recovery, and therefore need additional support for coming back from natural disasters and reigniting supply chains. 

This is especially important for industries with factories and workers in areas that may not have the tools to cope with something this disastrous. 

Modern-Day Natural Disasters: COVID-19 and the Supply Chain:
The same data can be used to handle hazards that affect people’s well-being and, thus, the supply chain. Natural disasters aren’t limited to storms and environmental shifts; biohazards are menacing, too. A good example of this is the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Categorized under natural hazards, this tore through communities globally, fully halting some supply chains and leading to many recovery efforts that are still ongoing. 

Understanding these natural disasters and providing education even to those who are at lower risk of being affected can lead to fewer economic losses, quicker recovery times, and better support networks for the companies, factories, and people affected.